hey it's your friend mel and welcome to the mel robbins podcast wouldn't you just love to have a powerful mindset that makes you unstoppable and finally get that road map to success that you deserve well today you're getting it because coach steve magnus who is 1 of the top performance and mindset coaches in the world i'm talking a guy who has coached elite athletes olympians d 1 professional athletes he is here in our boston studios for 1 reason to coach you and to teach you the exact same mental techniques that he has been using in the most elite settings that are rooted in courage purpose and excellence and you're getting it all today for free you're gonna learn how to train your mind just like the world's top performers do because when you change your mindset you change the game
so what does that look like well after the conversation today you're gonna know how to rise above any challenge become mentally tougher and more resilient and able to easily handle any challenge that life throws your way or with the people that you love and this is absolutely a conversation that you are gonna wanna share with everybody that you care about every athlete every student every person in your life that has bigger goals and a bigger possibility they need to hear this because whether you're an entrepreneur a parent a shift worker a nurse teacher working a desk job or you're a student what you're about to learn today will transform every area of your life and unlock your
next level of potential see when steve first started coaching elite runners he noticed something fascinating it wasn't just their talent it wasn't just their fitness level it was the way they trained their minds that set them apart his mental techniques have propelled some of the best athletes in the world to extraordinary success even when they were filled with doubt uncertainty and a string of losses today he's teaching you how to hack your mind and achieve anything you want
so are you ready to be coached because coach magnus is ready to coach you and he's here so let's do this hey it's your friend mel and welcome to the mel robbins podcast i am so excited for the conversation today i am thrilled to be learning from coach steve magnus i'm gonna tell you about him in just a minute and look it's always an honor to be able to spend time and be together with you and if you're a new listener i wanna take a moment and personally welcome you to the mel robbins podcast family i am
so glad that you're here and because you hit play on this particular episode here's what i already know about you you understand the power of your mindset and how your mind could help you unlock the next level of your potential and you're also here because you know that when you win the mental game you win the game of life and 1 more thing if somebody sent this episode to you here's what i wanna tell you about that i think that's pretty cool because it means you have people in your life that care about you and they know you could be unstoppable you could reach higher possibilities if you take to heart everything that our expert today is about to share with you see in our studios today we have a really extraordinary thing that's about to happen you and i are about to be coached by 1 of the world's top experts in mindset his name coach steve magnus steve has coached olympians professional athletes d 1 athletes and some of the world's top performers he's an elite runner himself a division 1 college coach and you're also going to hear the riveting story of how he turned whistleblower at 1 of the most elite nike training camps an experience that forever changed his life and his perspective on what mental toughness actually means coach steve has spent years helping the most elite runners in the world increase their athletic performance under pressure he's also the cofounder of the growth equation where he and his team teach the science art and practice of sustainable peak performance through groundbreaking research and interactive courses their work has been used by ironman world champions heart and lung transplant surgeons world class coaches across every single major sports league award winning creatives and leaders at some of the world's most respected brands he's written 5 best selling books including his latest win the inside game how to move from surviving to thriving and here's what i love most about coach steve yes he's coached olympic athletes through the mental and emotional pressure of competing in the biggest arenas at the highest stakes but you wanna know what makes him truly different it's how real relatable and accessible his tools techniques and strategies will be to you to your life and your goals he is here and he's got the cutting edge science compelling research and real world experience on the track in the classroom and in the game of life because the fact is when you know how to win the mental game you win the entire game of life
so without further ado please help me welcome coach steve magnus to the mel robbins podcast coach i am so glad you're here and i also feel like i owe your wife a huge thanks because i know you got 2 kids under the age of 2 and she said it was cool for you to jump on a plane fly across country and be here with us so huge shout out to your wife hillary thank you thank you thank you for being here
thanks so much for having me i'm excited to be here
i'm thrilled that you're here so i wanna read to you from your best selling book do hard things when the inside game how to move from surviving to thriving and free yourself up to perform and i'm reading this passage that really caught my attention on page 28 we all get stuck we don't reach our capabilities we get in our own way we feel trapped like we can't take the action that deep down we know we should this book is about freeing yourself up from whatever is preventing you from going on the journey to realizing your potential it's allowing yourself to be courageous for me the journey started with realizing that everything i'd been taught about success was wrong steve could you speak to the person who has made the time to be with us right
now who is so excited to learn how to win the inside game from you can you tell them what they might experience in their life that could be different based on everything that you're about to share with us today
the lesson that really astonished me in working with elite performers first athletes and then across the board is that all of us get in our own way and all of us are capable of more but we let fear anxiety self doubt that voice in our head tell us hey let's avoid this thing let's stop doing this thing and what i promise you today is i'm not i might not be able to fix all of your problems but i'm gonna give you the tools to lighten the load to be able to navigate that inner voice to be able to switch stress from seeing it always as a threat but as something that can challenge you and propel you forward and how to work with your brain and body instead of fighting against it endlessly coach i believe you i'm ready i'm
so glad that you're here you know the book is called win the inside game what does winning the inside game mean exactly and why is it so important to know how to do this
i think let's start with the opposite which is the external
okay
and i think the external is this is when we tie our identity to our achievements in fact there was a meta analysis a study of studies including 70,000 people that shows that when we prioritize and emphasize external
mhmm
more than the internal it is and i quote universally detrimental to our well-being so the inside game is opposite of that it's having clarity in who you are why you're pursuing something it's understanding that you get to define what success means it means that instead of just fitting in you find deep genuine connection and belonging to those who you're going on this journey with and when we find that when we go towards that what happens is instead of insecurity driving the ship we feel secure enough to take risks to take on challenges to see again what we're capable of and you know do the things that we wanna pursue you know i think i just got something out of that
so i think we make the mistake of looking at people that achieve things on the outside and believe that it's those achievements that are what you know outside and believe that it's those achievements that are what make them good risk takers and make them able to go after these things that we in our hearts wish we would do for ourselves but what you're actually saying is based on all of your experience coaching elite athletes olympians studying this mindset toughness and being a coach for it in highly competitive settings you're saying based on that and all the research it's actually the opposite it's those people that have learned how to win this inside game and who are secure in themselves who are actually able to take more risks is that right absolutely i'll give you a story okay give me a story
so sarah hall is 1 of america's top marathoners k she's 1 of the best in the world and she reached that level in later in her career than normally in her late thirties early forties is when she had her breakthrough and i got to work with sarah for a number of years and what i learned from her is the the race she had her ultimate breakthrough where she set the american record in the half marathon so fastest half marathon in american history for a woman and leading up into that race she had this i'm gonna set this record i'm paying attention to the outcome i'm going with the the external thing in about a month or 2 before the race she said you know what this is getting in the way i need to leave this behind and to quote her she said it is stealing my peace and instead what i'm gonna focus on is i'm gonna focus on the feeling and she defined the feeling as i wanna get in that race be surrounded by a bunch of other women not be threatened by them but realize that we're all bringing out the best in each of us and if i put myself in that spot and i enjoy that great things are gonna happen and to me like that's what it is you're seeing 1 of the best in the world telling you that the way that you set the record isn't to obsess over the record but to let go just enough and focus on that internal feeling and sensation and that security knowing that you can take that risk and if you fail it's not gonna be the end of the world because you got to feel that experience you got to go through that journey you you know what i hear in that story that is
so helpful and i think we can all relate to that whether we're like okay i gotta get into that nursing school or i've gotta meet the person by the time i turn 30 or i gotta be making this kind of money like that external thing when she made the switch what i heard was actually the switch from pressure and performance to a sense of faith that if you put yourself in the right environment and you tap into the energy of what it's gonna feel like to trust yourself there in that experience that the rest of it takes care of itself and a lot of that pressure that i would imagine can cause you to choke and get up into your head and kind of do things that you don't realize impact how you perform but your ability to relax in and have faith in just being in the experience is what helps you win it is i mean that's the essence of what we call flow in sports psychology which is that feeling of like everything clicks you cannot pressure your way into flow if you feel exceedingly amounts of pressure you can't get in that state
so ironically sometimes we try too hard in that trying that wanting the thing is what is preventing us from actually getting that goal because we're trying to force it i had a really good track coach who was a mentor who was the track coach of carl lewis and he told me 1 day he said steve most people have the wrong concept of effort they think effort means digging down trying harder and forcing yourself and he said no no effort is like carl and what he meant by that is if you watch carl lewis brent or usain bolt they are going all out but their cheeks are bouncing up and down sometimes they're smiling a little bit they're relaxed doing it because real effort is quiet it's how do we get the most out of our ourselves while being calm and relaxed doing it and it's that that kind of like paradox where we think we want to like try and dig but whenever we do that it backfires it's probably the same if i sat down to write if i said hey i need to write this wonderful paragraph that's gonna shock everyone and get them latched on to what i'm i'm talking about that paragraph isn't gonna be good right i've gotta put myself in that position on the chair and say hey i've done the research i'm a pretty good writer trust myself to figure it out completely you know it also all of that pressure for a lot of people also results in procrastinating and getting
so obsessed with how it's gonna turn out that you don't actually even do the damn thing and i think that's a very interesting thing for us to talk about because you know ultimately you create mental toughness in the athletes that you are coaching and in the companies that you go into and work with how do you define mental toughness and what do you think some of the common misconceptions around mental toughness is
so you mentioned that i have 2 under 2 so our our
what's 2 under oh 2 kids
under 2 2 kids under 2 so my almost 2 year old has hit the stage where she's throwing tantrums and my wife is also a elementary school teacher so she's an expert on kids throwing tantrums and if we look at why do kids throw tantrums here's where it occurs 2 year old maybe sees something that she wants mom and dad say no no no she doesn't quite grasp the concept of no she wants it she sees it she gets frustrated or angry or mad and because those emotions and feelings are overwhelming and kind of foreign for a 2 year old yeah right she goes into like freak out mode which eventually runs its course and then she shuts down toughness is navigating that freakout we experience the same thing as adults except it has more layers
so we feel discomfort or stress or anxiety or fatigue or whatever it is that emotion and that feeling and then we bring in the layer of our voice tends to go with it so our voice starts to get negative and spiral and talk think about oh i can't do this if i don't win this race or finish this or get this job i'm gonna be embarrassed we just spiral out of control and what happens is your brain gets the message it says hey we've got overwhelming emotions we've got a negative voice that is spiraling how do we escape this situation and our brain doesn't go how do we get the best result out of this situation right it says how do we get out of this right
now the quickest moment possible if i'm running a race the quickest thing is just slow down or stop if i'm trying to finish my you know dissertation or nursing exam or what happened the quickest thing is procrastinate like leave this don't come back to it because that'll alleviate it in the moment and what real toughness to me is navigating how do we understand our inner world and those emotions so that they don't overwhelm us how do we stop that spiral or that that rock rolling down the hill and gaining momentum how do we stop it early enough
so that we can do something about it and i think the misconceptions around toughness is that our kind of old school model tells us only 1 path which is that grit it out like fight the thing and often don't pay attention to your emotions or feelings like ignore them well sometimes that works generally on easy stuff on hard things where it actually matters it backfires because if i try and avoid the thing if i try and you know resist the thing we have a saying what we resist persists how do we learn to listen to our body better how do we change our self talk how do we change our focus to get us out of these spirals and navigate these situations i think i get it but just
so i make sure that the person who's here with us understands kinda how mental toughness is an important thing in their day to day life like how does having mental toughness help you navigate a job search or a breakup or you know we use the example of you know your wife's a teacher and you've had a really really tough week with the kids at school how does mental toughness help you in just your day to day life
yeah we'll start with the teacher 1 because i see this all the time
okay
teachers have 1 of the hardest jobs and it's sometimes a thankless job but they do amazing jobs so i love supporting my teachers out there here's what happens teaching is hard you get home you're overwhelmed and the tendency is to be like okay i'm so overwhelmed that i'm just shutting down and i can't do anything else mental toughness is realizing that like you're still gonna have to show up the next day and because you care about your job and and the kids like show up and teach them to the best of your ability how do you get over the or get through that overwhelm and get yourself back in that position
so for a teacher it could be something as simple as what is my get home shut down and reset routine that allows me to kinda deal with that stress take it off and say okay just for a couple hours i'm gonna get myself in a place where i rejuvenate and then can get a good night's sleep and then tackle the job again tomorrow with i think you said job search i think there is it's handling rejections it's because that feels personal yeah right you apply for the job you do everything that you you can to put yourself in the best position and someone essentially says you're not good enough or we don't want you and in that moment that can hit deep and toughness is realizing and and figuring out how do i create the space between that almost failure in my identity and who i am to be able to say i get it that person didn't select me but that doesn't mean that i'm not worthy as a human being and that i'm not capable of doing this job they just didn't see it how do i get back on the horse how do you do that with like let's say since you coach such elite athletes you've got an athlete and this is kinda part of your story too which we're gonna get into that just misses the olympic team or just misses the world record intellectually coach i get it like i gotta have a little bit of space for the rejection and the pain of coming just
so close but then there's that mental toughness skill that is your expertise what are some of the things that you would say to an athlete that you're coaching in those moments that feel similar to a job rejection right same psychological thing
same thing yeah so here i take them through a process first you can't deny that it hurts you have to accept and sit with it and live with it and realize that this thing you cared about you fell short in and that sucks there's no getting around it there's no faking it it just sucks so that's number 1 number 2 is you've gotta get your brain and body out of what i call stress and protect mode
k
where you're feeling all these stress hormones which pushes your brain to be like protect myself you know avoid the thing shut down which is our acute response to failure and you've gotta get it into how do i almost get into like a learning and growing mode and the best way to do this is simply socializing with friends
really
when we're around other people there's research that shows that when you're socializing with other people you produce a hormone called oxytocin
k
it's like a bonding hormone it's what's actually produced when you know women have babies to help them bond with the child same thing occurs for us in adults and what research tells us is it counteracts the kind of negative stress hormones that make us feel like worthless or alone or whatever have you after stress so the best thing you can do is with athletes i always tell them after the game if you lose guess what go have pizza with your friends like go eat and what that does is it shifts you out of that mindset and then the last part of this process is you gotta build yourself up you gotta give yourself evidence that you are worthy and here i like to do it in 2 different ways there's 1 i like to have people have what i call a evidence journal k which is write down things where you went through something tough and came out on the other side coach i'm picking up on the fact that your evidence journal is also part of the training it's sort of like the reps in a gym
so can you just tick off a couple examples of some of the little things that people start to write down as evidence right that they've survived other setbacks that the person listening might be able to relate to
so some of the things i like to do is like look at how consistent were you when you you know were preparing for this did you get your 5 days a week of training and people can look back and say i did it i did the training plan i showed up did you prioritize yourself did you the day before the the job interview did you get the sleep in that you you wanted to to prepare for the thing you're looking for how do i give myself the evidence that i gave myself the best shot that i i could and the other thing that i like to do is look through past kind of experiences and moments where it's like hey i came through this thing and the reason is pretty simple is our brain often has a negativity bias mhmm where we just latch onto and remember the times that it didn't go well why because they sting like we remember the things that sting more we forget all the times where it's like hey we showed up for practice when it was raining you know we showed up for the job even when we were tired the night before and we still got it done those things just go out the window
so we've gotta give our brain that information that reminds us like hey i've been here before i've gone through some tough things like you are capable of this and more
i think that's really important because i can say 1 of the things that i have to chronically work on is making sure that my relentless drive
mhmm
right to do better to be more efficient to have more fun in the way that we're working to make a bigger impact doesn't negate all of the amazing things that are actually going well can you give me an example of working with 1 of your athletes where their attitude or negativity was really starting to impact their performance
this is very common even at the elite level because often you think like oh these people have bulletproof minds yes right it's not true
what what do you mean it's not true how do you get to the olympics steve and not have a bulletproof mind
here's here's what i learned i used to think that i used to think oh there's something different about them but what you realize is the same problems that i'll literally talk about with a high school kid navigating the sat and basketball team tryouts are the same thing that i'll talk about with someone who's made the olympic team and trying to show up to the olympics
you're kidding me
no it's because it's a human problem
what do you mean by it's a human problem so the kid who's trying to make the basketball team and do well on the sats and the person who's just made the olympic team achieved a dream and now is getting ready to compete in the olympics they're both facing the same psychological problem
our human stress response which makes us see the negative to think that we're not good enough to think that we're gonna be overwhelmed and freak out on the starting line and not be able to show up how we wanna show up
what you're basically talking about is self doubt and choking
yeah this is why choking happens to the best of the best this is why simone biles got you know the twisties because it's not anything to do with her being weak or anything she's the total opposite of that amazing but our biology is wired the same and although the arena might be different our brain doesn't know the difference between what feels like a lot of pressure when we're at the high school gymnasium
yep
versus the olympic stadium where we see hundreds of thousands of people it's still pressure and we still feel it the same way it's not like it's proportional to the amount of people who are viewing us
this makes so much sense coach it's so cool what you do for a living because it does make sense to me that if you're going in for an interview for a job that you're really interested in of course you're gonna feel pressure because you wanna do well that's human nature if you're going in for an interview and for high school to talk to the coach hoping that the coach is gonna wanna recruit you for their team it's an interview that you care about it's the exact same psychological setup it's just that the place and the space is different but you're feeling the same thing it's about the scale of it based on your experience and that i think is why mental toughness is everything what do you do in those moments when it matters or when your emotions rise up because what you're also saying is it's not just a mental game it's also a physical 1 and in fact there's something that you write about in your book that i wanted to just read to you because we're on the topic of mental toughness
so you write about this very interesting thing in your book win the inside game and this is on page 1 23 in the 19 sixties scientists noted an interesting phenomenon when animals were pitted against 1 another in a lab from rats to chicks to fish when they were competing for resources the contest results shifted the animal's subsequent behavior the winner became more aggressive attacking whatever opponent stepped into the cage next the losers hesitated they retreated and defended hoping to avoid conflict the behaviors translated into consistent outcomes the winners kept winning at an alarming rate and the losers kept a streak of their own see what was interesting about reading this is that you basically are starting to make the case steve that it's not just your thoughts but with the emotions and then the way that your thoughts start to spiral there is a biology there's something physical and probably neurochemical happening in your body that winners learn that they have to fight to gain resources and losers come up with a different strategy you might think that winners keep winning simply because they're better fighters but research found that relative skill didn't explain the winning and losing streaks it's about what changes in the animal's biology when they either win or lose can you talk more about this this is some of the most fascinating research i've come across and it's called the winner and loser effect and what happens is we change our stress response based on the outcome of the event or even more
so our expectation of the event what i mean by that is after you win you tend to get a bump in testosterone testosterone and this has been found in both men and women k you get a bump in testosterone and that increase in testosterone makes you think hey i'm gonna be more confident going into this next thing i can take on this challenge and what tends to happen is next time you step into the arena your brain goes hey remember last time we got that bump in testosterone let's do that again so we're more likely to approach whatever it is we're taking with more challenge more testosterone and we have what psychologists call a challenge response if on the flip side yep is if you lose uh-huh and then especially if you stew in that loss k you think it is like overwhelming this is the end of the world my life is over i'm never gonna be able to do this thing again you have more cortisol and what your brain learns is it says hey this this this place really sucks
so next time we face something similar before you even step into the arena your brain defaults to producing more cortisol to try and convince you to avoid the situation you're getting in
okay so hold on let me just unpack this because i think this is so important in real life not that athletics is not real life if you've just been broken up with and then you're about to put yourself back out there this is an example where cortisol might spike and you might feel the uh-oh if you've been laid off and you're now starting to go for interviews it might be an uh-oh right if you didn't get into your dream school and now you're reapplying again your body is wired because of the sting of that to actually feel that hesitation and protection is am i getting this right absolutely spot on and what do you wanna say to those of us to the person listening who is either feeling this way
now or who has somebody in their life who now has this hesitation or feels defeated or is starting to really lose their edge what do you want us to know coach about these moments in our life and what to do about it
2 things 1 is we can influence this to a large degree based on our expectations
what
so what research tells us
k
is if we set the expectations which are based on essentially our brain goes what are the demands that we're facing and what are we capable of
k what are the demands that we're facing and what are we capable
of so if if you're sitting there and you're saying i got broken up with i'm putting myself back in the arena i'm going on the date the demands are i'm gonna have to talk to someone who i don't know very well and open up and put myself out there now your capabilities because last time it didn't go very well your brain goes like i don't know if you're capable of this
right
i don't know so what do you have to do in that situation you have to you have 2 options you can say okay i'm gonna set the expectations and sometimes lower them a little bit say hey this is my first date i'm not trying to set the world on fire i'm just going to put myself out there and go talk to them right lower those expectations k
so that's step 9 so 1 thing you can do is lower i don't have to get this job
i don't have to
okay gotcha i can i can just go and and the fact that i'm getting out there that's a win
yes
okay so lower expectations step 1
and the second part is improving that your capability side
k
which is in athletics what do we do we train you practice you practice in life you can do the same thing right if you are struggling and afraid of going on that first date go call up a friend and say hey we're gonna practice some conversations together i'm gonna talk about myself we're gonna role play this and it sounds a little silly but what it does is your brain goes okay i've been here before if you're keep being afraid of that job interview then you wanna go do some mock job interviews and the good thing is this is when you control the environment right and you're doing with with friends or family or someone who doesn't entice that fear around you then your brain doesn't automatically default and you can train that i love that
so i think i would i would even say i bet there's something else coach that you do with the people that you coach is it's actually very helpful to know that it is a hardwired response and a sign that your brain is working as it should that if i'm about to try something that i'm nervous about or the stakes are high or that i really sucked at or got screwed over or hurt by that it's normal to have your cortisol spike and it's normal to feel that hesitation but i got options
so the hesitation now doesn't scare me because i should expect to be nervous and then you just taught me just lower your expectations i don't have to kill this thing i just have to like i'm just gonna put myself out there and then the second thing is kinda obvious but we avoid it if we're stressed out which is just practice this feels like the perfect moment to take a quick pause let everything that you have poured into us just really set in i wanna also give you a chance to share this with people that you care about if you've got a high school athlete you've got somebody that wants to do better at work you've got somebody that needs to strengthen the mental game because what are we learning when you change your mindset you change the game share this episode with them we all need a little coach steve in our life and don't go anywhere because after this short break we've got a lot more to cover more tools more tips we're gonna continue to win the inside games stay with me
welcome back it's your buddy mel robbins i am so thrilled you are here thank you for sharing this with people that you care about you and i are learning how to win the inside game and get mentally tough with coach steve magnus you have such a fascinating career and we're gonna get into it but you've transitioned from a my opinion world class athlete to an olympic coach to a best selling author of not 1 not 2 but literally 5 books to now being a sought after and world renowned elite performance and mindset coach both with elite athletes with you know some of the world's leading brands how has your personal journey and the twists and turns of your career and the people that you have been coaching shaped your understanding of mental toughness and how to build it i think i've had a diversity of experiences that you outlined which has made me realize that my early on view of toughness which was only through sport was kinda wrong meaning i grew up in the like you know no pain no gain like just push and that's what i thought and the other thing that really i think was an moment which is during my i think my first book is i got to interview a guy named matt billingsley who is a world class drummer who is
now the drummer for taylor swift and it was 1 of my first big interviews where i'm like this is awesome let's let's go and i'm like just tell me about what it's like to be on stage with like you know a 100,000 screaming people and you doing your thing and he starts walking me through how he's preparing and as i'm listening to this i'm all i'm thinking in my mind is like this is how i would mentally prepare for a race
what was he saying
well the thing that struck me is he said i don't really drum much before the you know the concert said i already know how to drum what i'm doing is first i'm getting my body loose i'm going through all these like you know stretching and things to get my body feeling good and then i'm getting my mind right which is like just rehearsing the beginning of of a couple of different songs so that i can get in that groove in the state of performance that i need to get in and he walked me through all that and i said i said this is the same kind of stuff that i do for a race and what it real made me realize is that performance is performance
so performance is performance means the thing that you have to do is the thing that you have to do whether it's an interview or a date or a presentation or work or stepping onto a track and running in the state championship yeah that's the thing you have to do but the thing that comes before it what is that coach
it's setting up your environment well
k
so what that means is like you prime yourself to perform this is why athletes put on their special race day shoes they put on their jersey matt had the drumsticks that he used for you know concert times he's got everything lined up where this is what it it's gonna be i put myself in the environment that's going to invite the action that i wanna take it's setting your mindset right what am i trying to do am i seeing this as a opportunity to take on or is this thing that is causing this overwhelming anxiety or feeling like a threat and i think what i realized it's not just from matt's story but also others is it's the same stuff as i said my wife's a teacher early in her career she was a world class runner she represented the us at a at a half marathon world championships and no big deal no you know she's but you 2 are gonna have really fast kids you know that don't put the pressure on our 2 year old
now sorry but what i realized is that again when she got into teaching she's takes the same mindset she's like i wanna be great at this and what you realize is like okay what does that take consistently showing up putting in the training being prepared for the next day and priming yourself okay how am i gonna get into the mindset where i am like enthusiastic and energetic because kindergarteners guess what you gotta they you gotta keep their attention and you can't do that by just walking in the door and being like okay i'm here like let's talk about our colors and abcs or what have you you've gotta think about the tactics that you're going to use you know what i love about what you're saying coach is that i think we get
so obsessed about the performance or the thing that we have to do at work or the thing that we have to do at school or the way that it's gonna turn out or the result that we don't take the time to think about the environment or the steps leading up to the thing that actually allow you to step on the field of life and do the thing
who do you wanna be who do you wanna show up as like that's that's it
is that what you ask the people you coach who do you wanna be
absolutely who do you because here's the thing is and this is something else that people often don't get is if you look at some of the elite performers is that who they are on game day when they step out on the field is a little bit different than who they are at home
how so
so i'll give the example of aaron judge the baseball player for the yankees is he puts it like this is on the field i wanna be 99 which is his number 99 and i'm paraphrasing is aggressive he plays hard he wants to win when i take that jersey off i'm no longer 99 i'm aaron you know aaron gets along with his family he doesn't need to be hypercompetitive at everything he can let things go but you see that all the time with athletes because what happens is like we all have kinda different states we can get into even just that invitation coach who do you wanna be it's it's a way that you can snap yourself into a moment of intentionality to basic who do i wanna be in the interview who do i wanna be today at work who do i wanna be when i show up at that parent teacher conference and by asking yourself that i would imagine that's part of the mental toughness because you're cueing your mind right to start to think about these things you're spot on who do you wanna be in this situation and i think too often we don't put the thought and care to align ourselves with that action when you were in high school you as a elite runner came extremely close to breaking the 4 minute mile which is a goal that you had had forever and the fact that you missed it by a second
haunted you on 1 hand but that failure also has fueled your life's work what did not reaching that goal teach you about life and how you coach other people when it comes to mindset and performance
at that time i think in the history of the us only 5 high schoolers had broken the 4 minute barrier so it's something that basically never happened and i came to chi and i still can picture it to this day there's 4 laps around the track every lap needs to be under a minute so you're literally watching the clock and you're seeing it and you're like i'm still under i'm still under i'm still under in going into that last 100 meters i can see that clock and realizing oh no i'm gonna be right at it or just shy and then i remember crossing that line there's like 30 before the results come out i'm staring at the results board and then i see myself 4 minutes and 1 second and it's just devastating because you see this thing that is your goal it was literally written on the wall of my high school bedroom where this is the thing that i'm gonna do that is gonna define myself i didn't care about anything else in high school nothing parents couldn't get me to care about anything except running and i fell short and for a while i think that got to me i couldn't do it i put everything into it and found out that i wasn't good enough everything i learned about performance came as a result of being like okay let's analyze this let's figure out how do we get on the other side of feeling this ultimate failure in making it into something worthwhile and good and that's where my search for understanding the mental side of sport came from if i didn't let go and pull the other way just enough i wasn't gonna be able to fulfill my potential because every race was gonna feel like life or death and it did we all have our 4 minute miles we all have those things where we create that story in our head where it's like oh this is what i care about deeply this is what i'm obsessed with and we can't because we care about it we think that if we just let go a little bit that that means oh that means i'm weak that means i'm not all in that means that i'm not actually striving for that but what it actually means is it allows that inner game to flourish because our brain goes like okay yeah yeah like the 4 minute mile matters like getting that job selling this many books whatever it matters like let's be real but it can't be the only thing we've gotta have something else pulling in the other direction i absolutely love this because you also say that the inner game is not about like checking boxes that it's the process of chasing goals and why does tying the achievement or landing that job or getting into that medical school or being married by this date or having that car
that you drive why does those things on the outside actually end up screwing you over
what happens is when we tie our identity to that external pursuit it makes us fragile instead of resilient because our brain goes if i don't get this goal then it literally is life or death i am not worth anything we don't perform best in that situation we need to take a little bit of the pressure off we need to have that robustness where you realize that i am secure in who i am in win or lose it might sting but i'm still who i am i'm still surrounded by those who love and support me they're still gonna be here and that's where we perform best at because we get to take those risks instead of feeling like oh gosh here it is i'm gonna fall short again brain freaks out i just love listening to you and i wanna take a quick pause
so that we can hear a word from our amazing sponsors and i also wanna give you a chance to share coach magnus' incredible wisdom with the people that you care about every 1 of us needs to know how to win the inside game and that's exactly what we're doing today and don't go anywhere because after this short break coach and i we're gonna be waiting for you i mean we got a lot of ground to cover and we're gonna do that when we return stay with us welcome back it's your buddy mel robbins i am
so glad you're here today because you and i are getting coaching from 1 of the most respected and renowned mindset coaches on the planet i'm talking about coach steve magnus we're learning about how we win the inside game you know there's super fascinating research in your book that i think is really important to read right now because i was really surprised by this and it goes to this point because again i think it's super counterintuitive to think okay the world's top top top top top performers whether it's in business who you're coaching or it is the world's like most elite athletes they're maniacally focused they're 1000% disciplined it's hustle hustle hustle they're focused on the super bowl they're focused on this thing the research actually shows the opposite and i'm reading from win the inside game page 90 this is research that you write about from michigan state university i was blown away with this that they looked at over 100 years of nobel prize winning scientists and it turned out that what these nobel prize winning scientists did in their downtime away from the lab may have proved vital the distinguished scientists check this out were 22 times more likely to perform sing or act 12 times more likely to pursue creative writing and about 7 times more likely to participate in crafts like sculpting painting or glass blowing whereas their less accomplished peers were more likely to be entirely focused on their scientific research and
so this research basically you know as you're writing your book is like that going all in and attaching who you are to 1 achievement or to the fact that you're the chief resident or you're married to so and so or you drive this this singular focus actually hinders us
it does and it runs counter to just about everything we're told completely just go all in be obsessed only care about this thing and the research as you said on nobel winning scientists shows it's different there's research on entrepreneurs that the ones who are more likely to actually succeed don't quit their day job early on there's research on athletes that show that they generally those who make it to the top of the top are more diversified in both their sports early on and then their later interests because what it does is it makes us resilient because if we fail at the 1 thing and that's all that matters comes back to that our brain and the alarm we produce a ton of cortisol your brain says i'm losing my identity is at stake like shut down if we have other things in our life that we care about that give us something else to think about give us other pursuit to kind of do interesting things on then even though the loss stings you still have that resilience in your life it's sort of like being like a stool
so instead of being on a unicycle you have 3 wheels a tricycle various things that give you grounding and foundation in your life you know in your experience coach especially with olympic athletes elite performers what habits do mentally tough people tend to have
what you see is they prioritize consistency over intensity meaning they don't just shoot for like the magic day where everything aligns they're like hey i've gotta figure out how to show up day after day even on the bad days right even on the days when things aren't going well where maybe we don't get the full workout in but we get something in because they know that if they stack enough solid days after days then that is what leads to greatness in fact way back when i was a college coach i tracked this i tracked how many times did people show up to practice in workouts and how many times did they miss them and then i ran a correlation between improvement and who showed up and guess what strong correlation the people who showed up and didn't miss days performed better in fact the person who showed up the most during that period was this young lady who came in and i kid you not her freshman year in a race of a 100 plus people i think she was 90 ninth out of like a 101 by her senior year she was qualified for the first round of the national championships wow huge jump and if you looked at the data out of everybody on the team throughout that period she missed the least amount of practice she missed the least amount of workouts i mean it's incredible yeah and that is what mental toughness creates is the ability to meet those moments and process what happened and learn from it right and step back on the track and grow and
so much of it is the story that we tell ourselves in our head because we get locked in these these negative stories that again define us as i'm not good at this thing and if you talk to again elite performers could be athletes whoever it is what you realize is they start to tell themselves stories that are about like growth and agency meaning taking control of the situation what can i do about it versus stories that are kinda push us down and where we can't do things about it where there is no path forward
so it's all about figuring out how to tell yourself that story
it's such great advice and as a coach you're already using their name and talking to them that way but we can do that to ourselves by using hey mel you can handle this hey mel it's shake it off like what what are some of the things that you would say just reflexively to 1 of your athletes if you're trying to boost a shift in their mindset
so number 1 is i tend to give them an action
okay
actions work better
so instead of telling someone hey mel you need to relax like in the history of the world i don't think telling someone to relax has ever worked
yep
so instead i say hey mel shake out your arms get a little loose and what happens is your body goes like okay i'm gonna let go some of this tension therefore i'm gonna relax action is number 1 number 2 is what do they need to be focused on because generally what happens is is stress like either we narrowly focus on the negative yep see all the bad things or our brain goes like scattershot and it's like all over the freaking place so what we have to do is say okay what matters i'm gonna focus on that there's research on this if you're a field goal kicker and you're feeling pressure and your mind's all over the place what you literally do is say focus on that spot right there stare at it and kick it there and that will help you perform and we can do that in our other aspects of life which is like give it a narrow goal or narrow thing to latch onto and tell yourself to focus on that in the third person in the third person mel just focus on the
next right move mel just focus on the phone call you need to make we'll worry about that other thing later
bingo
wow so coach how do you train yourself to handle like hard tasks like you know you find yourself not that motivated you got something that you need to do can you train yourself i mean you're an elite runner so i i'm sure you can push through just about anything but for the rest of us mere mortals who are having trouble getting up the stairs without feeling winded like how do you hack this like let's say you're somebody who's alright a goal is i really wanna get my finances under control i need to create a budget i need to cut some expenses i need to get serious about what i wanna save like it's time for me to stop jerking around about this k
so that's your goal but then you go i don't wanna face my horrible spending habits i don't wanna look at the fact that i literally have no savings so how does it work in this scenario
start with the smallest step forward where you can make progress
okay
so in this example it might be take the thing that is staring you in the face that you spend money on that you know you shouldn't and just focus first on that maybe it's every morning you go get your special foam latte at starbucks and you say this is what i need this spending habit is i know i shouldn't do it every day so i need to fix this that's it narrow in on that 1 and you minimum viable progress so maybe it's instead of every day i say i'm a you know what
next week i'm gonna go 2 days a week and that's what i'm gonna allow myself to do and what happens is you make progress and you get these small wins and small wins give us a a bump in this like feel good hormones that say hey look steve you're making progress and if we can stack enough small wins then that allows us to take the next step in the next big thing and that's all it is it sounds almost ridiculously simple but what prevents us from taking on the hard things is we only see the hard things right again i love running
so too many running examples but if someone who had never run came up to me and said hey i wanna go to a marathon i wouldn't say great we're gonna tackle a marathon i'd be like no no we're gonna go on walks and then when you get to your street i want you to jog the street home because all you're trying to do is say simple small progress and if you can stack that day after day that is what creates that mental muscle and gives your brain evidence of like okay i've made progress and it stokes that motivational fire
so coach makes perfect sense and you and i both know that the second you even do the small thing that you're going to face discomfort and even if we just keep it in the lane of personal changes whether somebody you know just heard you say walk and they're like you know i do need to start to take better care of myself i do need to move my body more consistently and that's a goal of mine to really make that a priority and so you can break it down and say okay i'm gonna go for a walk after a week of that i'm gonna jog back down my block to my house but you're going to face tremendous discomfort because you've never done it before and you say that discomfort is an opportunity to train your mental muscle if we wanna train discomfort or train toughness we've gotta do the very small things that make us realize that hey this discomfort is just a signal and sometimes that signal is like accurate meaning we've got you know you sprain your ankle and you need to listen to that discomfort right it's a pain signal that's like fix this get off of your foot like take care of it
so here's a non athletic example we all all are kind of addicted to our phones yes k and what happens is i bet you the listener have experienced this is that you feel in your pocket your phone vibrate and you're like oh there's that buzz and you reach for your phone you pick it up and there's no notification it's called phantom vibration it occurs in about 90 percent of us
wait literally the phone didn't vibrate yeah you're kidding me
yeah
90 percent of people experience a phantom vibration
depending on the research but yes about 90 percent of people feel it and the reason is because your brain is saying like hey here's this thing you give a lot of attention to and like you feel good when it buzzes and beeps and you get a notification so we're essentially like almost mistakenly going to predict that because that's what we're locked on to k now if i take that phone away what happens is you probably feel a little bit of discomfort
oh yeah you get fidgety you're like where is the thing you're worried you start thinking that something might be wrong with somebody and what if they can't reach me and what am i missing and i'm gonna get trouble at work and where did the thing go and oh my god
your brain catastrophizes yeah your brain your inner voice goes crazy i experienced it we all experienced it
k
k if we wanted to turn down that alarm what would we do we'd take our phone for a small bit and we'd say okay i'm gonna for an hour i'm gonna leave it in the other room and at first what would happen your brain would go crazy i'm spiraling out of control what if someone's getting at me but if you left it for that hour at some point your brain would let go and say you know what i'm gonna see it at an hour the world isn't gonna end and if and that right there is training toughness for discomfort you know what i love about this example is i i think that at this point in time every single 1 of us has a very conflicted relationship with our phone every single 1 of us wishes we spent less time on it we all know intellectually we should and we've also been told a million times that we should create boundaries but none of that actually changes behavior and what i really like about your invitation here coach is that you're framing this as an opportunity to train mental toughness in yourself and being tough enough mentally to not allow distraction emotion craving anxiety whatever it is that's gonna rise up no matter what to derail you from staying focused and present or just performing and doing what you need to do what kind of person do you wanna be and i don't wanna be a person that's beholden to my phone i don't want the phone to have more power over me than i have over myself and it's a powerful thing to build inside yourself this ability to not be rattled by something outside of you and that's what you're actually talking about you're actually training your presence and your mental toughness in a way that helps you not only for you know dealing with your phone but everything else in life you also talk about how listening to your body is a form of mental strength rather than a sign of weakness what is 1 like mental drill or a tool that the person listening can implement this week to start building this mental toughness and real resilience i think the most powerful thing you can do to develop mental resilience is time spent alone in your head when we make our inner world seem foreign when we make our inner world seem like a threat like it's distant from who we are then our brain reacts accordingly and it says oh my gosh i'm alone in my head because being alone with your thoughts is kind of foreign and threatening if you're listening to this podcast i'm gonna tell you pick something doesn't matter what it is pick
something where phone's at the side it's just you alone with your thoughts for a short period of time because that's how you navigate things and in fact the late great kobe bryant put this brilliantly when he was talking about youth basketball practices he at his daughter's youth basketball practice someone was yelling at their kid to what to think about and what to do from the sideline and bryant said i told that parent this is the key moment your kid is learning how to be alone with their head and negotiate in their head that's where we learn how to be tough you don't want them to focus on external things you the parent screaming at them because chances are they're not gonna listen to you in the game they need to learn this skill
so it doesn't matter if it's sport or life figure out something where it's you alone in your head and give yourself just a little bit of time and space and that'll create toughness
you know we've talked a lot about not only how maniacally focusing on outer success and achievement and all the things that we chase can backfire on you and you have given us tool after tool after tool and all the research on how we can not only win the inside game but we can build the skill of mental toughness and there was a time in your life where all of the things that you were chasing on the outside just blew up in your face and i would love for you to take us back to what was probably 1 of the hardest moments of your entire life you were 26 years old you had your dream job and absolutely everything just flipped on its head can you just describe what the job was and what happened i got the job for what was then called the nike oregon project which was essentially nike sponsored an elite track and field team where literally the goal was to win olympic championships and you land this at 26 you're 1 of the coaches i was the assistant coach 26 the youngest professional coach in the sport fresh out of graduate school i thought i had hit the freaking lottery and i was told i was like you know what this goes well you're gonna be this program is going to be yours you're going to lead these professional athletes and
let me tell you in running this is really rare because there's only a handful of professional teams that do this at this level and it was with the premier you know sporting goods company in the world and i thought i had my dream job i told everyone i had my dream job my parents were like oh thank god like we are set like steve is killing it and then months into it i started to see things that raise some red flags or i started to see some documents that suggested from the sports scientists at nike that suggested like there are some cheating going on some nefarious things going on that didn't fit the rules of the sport and at first i remember calling my parents in in the stairwell at nike and saying hey i just saw this document that mentioned testosterone medication which is a banned substance in sport and they're like oh no and at first you rationalize it because you're like this is where i wanna be this is it but eventually what happened is it just nod at me and going back to asking that question who do you wanna be i have a clear view of how i see myself in terms of ethics and morals and what i want out of sport especially a sport like running where no 1 gets in it to become a millionaire you get in it for the love of the competition itself to try and make that olympic dream that you have as a kid and i came face to face where i had a decision where do i keep going and keep my quote unquote dream job or do i stick to my ethics and morals and values and quit and essentially blow the whistle you know what's interesting is you're right about this moment because as you started to tell people and you write about this moment in the stairwell that you risked your career and your livelihood and you ignored advice from friends and lawyers and even a prominent judge who told you at this time it may be the right thing to blow the whistle on this but whistleblowers seldom come out on top you're risking your career before it even gets started and you go on to write after all i was at my dream job i was the heir apparent to the best funded professional track team in the country 1 with a future olympic champion and medalist it was everything i ever wanted professionally the advice family members kept repeating was can you just stick it out through the olympics i was there for a year and a half before i'd had enough we like our stories simple the hero who overcomes adversity the woman who values or hard earned and firmly held who prevails
against all odds we think of ourselves in similar ways crafting a personal narrative where we are the hero of the story we even have a psychological immune system a protective mechanism to thwart negative self evaluations we want to think of ourselves as good moral decent people we shove away the messiness as you read this story you probably believe you would have done the right thing immediately if thrust into that same position what happened like how long were you wrestling
with what to do
months yeah i mean it took me months at first to decide to quit and then once i left it took me months to actually blow the whistle and tell somebody there was this deep inner feeling this gnawing away that just kept occurring where i was like gosh i can't live with this feeling this isn't who i am and then more so i'd see other people who were like me young and probably were sitting there thinking i got the dream job and we're headed out there and i couldn't help myself but thinking oh my gosh they have no idea what they're getting into they have no idea what decisions they're gonna face or what the environment is like and those feelings were what eventually pushed me to say okay what can i live with like who do again who do i wanna be do i want my values to be slogans or do i want them to be things that i can look at and say deep down this is this they mean something and eventually what happened again i didn't even tell anybody this i just said you know what i'm gonna do it i'm gonna blow the whistle i wrote a long email to us anti doping who is a regulatory body and said here's everything i know let's talk let's start that process and it was the most scared i'd ever been in my life what was it like to hit send on that it was just this experience where you're like i kinda know what i'm getting into but i have no idea and my life is about to turn upside down and i'm gonna lose a little bit of control over my life because this other thing is going to potentially dominate and again i'm some shy introvert who just wants to you know coach some people help people perform well and then go home and like you know sit at home and read a good book and i was like i'm about that's that's not gonna be possible and it wasn't i have reporters who you know came to my house and stalked it to followed me at work i had the fbi show up as i was backing out of the garage of my house and knock on the the car window and show me some badges like i'm in the movie and it was just stuff that i was like i i couldn't even imagine but you just there was no other possibility except i had to figure out how to navigate it what happened the head coach and the head doctor of the program were banned had a ban from the sport and positive change came out of it where people a understood and then i
think some increased safety and and guards to make sure that that didn't happen in the future occurred but it took 10 years to go from hitting send on that email essentially to when the final appeal happened because like there were lawyers and all sorts of things and evidence and i had to turn over my computer and phone and have everyone go through everything i'd ever written it was the most try more than any experience i had in sport or life like it pushed me to the max of how do i keep my sanity and not lose who i am and not let that kind of negativity spiral take over because there are absolutely points where i'm like i don't i'm i've lost control of my life what did it teach you if you would have outlined everything that i would have had to go through before i hit send on that email i would have said no way in hell because it was tough but it taught me that like we're always capable of more and the other thing that i think it really brought home is that 2 things is that we get to write our own story
so even though it felt like i've lost control of my life i was in charge i got to say you know what whatever who cares what the external world sees what matters to me how am i judging myself on this how am i defining my life based on this how do i wanna integrate this experience into the story i'm telling about myself and the last thing and i think most important thing is is that i realized that toughness is not the stoic individual pursuit that we often portray it as it is not the individual hero in the movie it takes a village and it takes support and if you don't have loved ones and the support and the friends who are gonna say you know what steve i see you're struggling i'm here for you whatever that means i get those texts i get those calls and sometimes it i take them up on it and sometimes just seeing that text reminds you like okay i'm not alone i've got people in my corner and i think that's what it is is is that when we talk about doing tough things is maybe the answer is we talked about a lot of tools and tips but it's making sure that you have genuine people who love and support you surrounding you because if you do like they're gonna be the people who allow you to handle the challenges and who are there when you can't use any of the tips and tricks you just need a shoulder literally to cry on or a hug to support you to make you realize that like it's going to be okay life will work out what are your parting words my parting words for you the listener is that you can do this you've got this you're capable of more and that capability doesn't mean doing something heroic it just means taking the
next small step towards the challenge that that you want to embrace that's what it is it's consistency over intensity and if you can take that small step then you're gonna build the momentum to change you know who you are and what your pursuit is
coach steve magnus you absolutely showed up and just dusted this thing i mean in the rankings of podcast interviews i would say you broke the 4 minute mile
thank you i i that's i try to do the best that i can and show up who i am and help people and who who how i can so
well i appreciate how you got into that chair and it was very clear that you asked yourself the question who do i wanna be and you put on the coach and i'm gonna speak power into the person that's listening and you delivered thank you thank you thank you and i also wanna thank you thank you for taking the time to listen to something that will absolutely improve your life like this is a life changing conversation i'm so thrilled you are listening and watching all the way to the end thank you for sharing this with everybody in your life that you care about because we all need to know how to win the inside game and i am
so blown away by what we learned today i can't wait to see how it changes your life because i know that it's going to and in case no 1 else tells you i wanted to be sure to tell you that i love you i love you for listening and watching this i believe in you i believe in your ability to create a better life and you got a road map and tools today so go use them alrighty i'll see you in the next episode i'll be waiting for you the moment you hit play let me find this you're doing great you're
so good
thank you
you're welcome killing it
she represented the us at a at a half marathon world championships in
no big deal no you know
she's but
you 2 are gonna have really fast
kids you know that don't put the pressure on our 2 year old now sorry
so will you just explain first second and third because i always mix those up
yeah i do too and i'm a writer so that we're both writers this is bad you were thank you incredible thank you
you better get ready for a lot more podcast interviews because
that was fun wow you guys you guys make it so easy though
awesome good job everybody alright now i can watch videos oh and 1 more thing and no this is not a blooper this is the legal language you know what the lawyers write and what i need to read to you this podcast is presented solely for educational and entertainment purposes i'm just your friend i am not a licensed therapist and this podcast is not intended as a substitute for the advice of a physician professional coach psychotherapist or other qualified professional got it good i'll see you in the
next episode stitcher